Rbac (#140)
percona/everest-doc: docs/administer/rbac.md

# Role Based Access Control

Role-based access control (RBAC) restricts access to resources within Percona Everest. It establishes a framework that defines access permissions and privileges according to individual users' roles. With RBAC, only authorized individuals can access specific information or perform certain actions based on their assigned roles. This method improves security by minimizing the risk of unauthorized access and helps manage permissions more efficiently across Percona Everest.

## Default role

> In Percona Everest, the only predefined default role is **admin**. The **admin** user is a superuser and it has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.
> 
> - `role:admin` - unrestricted access to all resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Percona Everest, the only predefined default role is **adminrole:role**, which is assigned to the **admin** user. Hence, this **admin** user has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.
```

This default built-in role definition can be seen in [policy.csv](https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L91).

## RBAC resources and privileges

Below is a comprehensive table outlining the permissions granted for various **resources**:

??? info "Permissions for resources"

    !!! info "Important"
        If you have permission for specific namespaces or resources, you can perform read, update, create, or delete actions only on those resources or only within those namespaces. However, if you have permission for **all** the resources or namespaces, you can carry out these actions across all the resources and namespaces.

    </br> </br>

    **Table: Privileges for the various resources in Percona Everest**

>     |**Resource**| **Read**| **Create**| **Update**|**Delete**|
>     |------------|---------|-----------|-----------|----------|
>     | Namespaces|You can view namespaces| :x:  |:x: | :x:|
>     | Database engines</br> MySQL, MongoDB, PostreSQL|You view can database engines when you create databases</br>  </br>**Note**: This policy must at least be **read all** so the users can create databases.| :x: |Modify database engines| :x:|
>     | Database clusters|You can view databases| You can create databases|You can modify databases| You can delete databases|
>     | Backups storage and Monitoring endpoints|You can siew backups and monitroing endpoints| You can create backups and monitroing endpoints|You can modify backups and monitroing endpoints| You can delete backups and monitroing endpoints|
>     | Database data (credentials)|View database data (credentials) </br> </br>**Note**: If no policy is defined:</br> * You cannot see the credentials and the connection string.</br> * You also cannot create a database from any backup.| :x: |:x:| :x:|

Reviewer: I think in this table we should use the same name as we do in the RBAC policy. Also `database-cluster-backups` and `database-cluster-restores` are missing

```suggestion
    |**Resource**| **Read**| **Create**| **Update**|**Delete**|
    |------------|---------|-----------|-----------|----------|
    | namespaces|You can view namespaces| :x:  |:x: | :x:|
    | database-engines </br> (MySQL, MongoDB, PostreSQL)|You view can database engines when you create databases</br>  </br>**Note**: This policy must at least be **read all** so the users can create databases.| :x: |Modify database engines| :x:|
    | database-clusters|You can view databases| You can create databases|You can modify databases| You can delete databases|
    | backup-storages and monitoring-instances |You can siew backups and monitroing endpoints| You can create backups and monitroing endpoints|You can modify backups and monitroing endpoints| You can delete backups and monitroing endpoints|
    | database-cluster-credentials|View database data (credentials) </br> </br>**Note**: If no policy is defined:</br> * You cannot see the credentials and the connection string.</br> * You also cannot create a database from any backup.| :x: |:x:| :x:|
```

## Policy definition in RBAC

RBAC policies are the rules and guidelines that define how roles, permissions, and users are managed within RBAC. These policies ensure that users have appropriate access to resources based on their roles within Percona Everest.

The policy definiton in Percona Everest is:

> ```sh
> p, adminrole:role, <resource>, <action>, <namespace>/<resourcename>
> ```
>     
> Where:
> 
>  **adminrole:role**: refers to the subject. It can also be name of the user.
> 
>  **resource**: could be namespaces, database engines, etc.
> 
>  **action**: such read, create, update, delete
> 
> **namespace/resourcename**: `*/*` is a wildcard indicating all namespaces and all resources.
> . Alternatively it can be of the format `<namespace>/<resourcename>.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
p, <subject>, <resource-type>, <action>, <resource-name>
```
    
Where:

 **subject**: refers to the name of a role or user. For example `adminrole:role` or `admin`

 **resource-type**: refers to the type of resource in Everest. For example, `database-clusters`, `database-cluster-engines`, etc.

 **action**: refers to the action the subject can perform. For example, read, update, delete, create, or '*'

**resource-name**: refers to a specific instance of the given resource-type. This argument should be prefixed with the namespace in which the resource is present. For example `my-namespace/my-cluster-1`, `my-namespace-2/my-backup-1`, etc. You may also use a wildcard, such as `'*'`, `'*/*'` or `'my-namespace/*'`
```

### Super Admin policy

> Check out the policy for a **Super Admin** role:

Reviewer: What's Super Admin? Is it any different from admin? I think we should stick with `admin` unless they have different meanings..

Author: Fixed

```sh
    p, adminrole:role, namespaces, read, *
    p, adminrole:role, database-engines, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, database-clusters, *, */*

>     p, adminrole:role, database-clusters-credentials, read, */*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-credentials, read, */*
```

    p, adminrole:role, backup-storages, *, */*

>     p, adminrole:role, monitoring-instances, *, */*

Reviewer: `database-cluster-backups` and `database-cluster-restores` missing. See correct policy here: https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L91-L99

Author: Done

```

### Read only policy

Check out the policy for a **readonly** role:

```sh
    p, readonly:role, namespaces, read, *
    p, readonly:role, database-engines, read, */*
    p, readonly:role, database-clusters, read, */*
    p, readonly:role, backup-storages, read, */*
    p, readonly:role, monitoring-instances, read, */*

> ```

Reviewer: `database-cluster-backups` and `database-cluster-restores` missing. See correct policy here: https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L91-L99

Author: Done

### Examples

#### Admin group role for a single namespace

Let's set up an Admin group role definition for just one namespace called `the-dark-side`.

```sh
 p, admin-darkside:role, namespaces, read, the-dark-side
 p, admin-darkside:role, database-engines, *, the-dark-side/*
 p, admin-darkside:role, database-clusters, *, the-dark-side/*

>  p, admin-darkside:role, database-clusters-credentials, read, the-dark-side/*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 p, admin-darkside:role, database-cluster-credentials, read, the-dark-side/*
```

#### Dev group role definition with read/update/create access to all the namespaces

Let's set up a dev group role with **read/update/create** access to **all** the namespaces:

```sh
 p, team-darkside:role, namespaces, read, `*/*`
 p, team-darkside:role, database-engines, read, `*/*`
 p, team-darkside:role, database-clusters, read, `*/*`
 p, team-darkside:role, database-clusters, update, `*/*`
 p, team-darkside:role, database-clusters-credentials, read, `*/*`
 p, team-darkside:role, backup-storages, read, `*/*`
 p, team-darkside:role, monitoring-instances, read, `*/*`
```

??? Example "Let's dive into decoding this!"

    The `team-darkside` role has the following privileges in **all** the namespaces:

    - **namespace**:  `Read` access in all the namespaces.
    - **Database engines**: `Read` access to all the database engines
    - **Database clusters**:  `Read` and update access for all the database clusters
    - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess for **all** the databases
    - **Backup storages**: `Read` access to all the backup storages
    - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access to all the monitoring instances

> ## Assign users to a group and grant them permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Assigning roles to users
```

> In RBAC policy each group can have multiple users and roles associated with it. You can assign a user to a group as follows. Add the following in `ConfigMap`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for roles to take effect, they need to be assigned to users. The syntax for this is as follows:
```

```sh
g, username, rolename
```

> A new user in Percona Everest will initially have **no** permissions. To grant permissions, you must explicitly change your RBAC configuration file (`configmap`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new user in Percona Everest will initially have **no** permissions. To grant permissions, you must edit your RBAC configuration stored in the `everest-rbac` `ConfigMap` in the `everest-system` namespace:
```

> 
> To change the `configmap`, execute the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    </br> </br>

    **Table: Privileges for the various resources in Percona Everest**

    |**Resource**| **Read**| **Create**| **Update**|**Delete**|
    |------------|---------|-----------|-----------|----------|
    | namespaces|You can view namespaces| :x:  |:x: | :x:|
    | database-engines </br> (MySQL, MongoDB, PostreSQL)|You view can database engines when you create databases</br>  </br>**Note**: This policy must at least be **read all** so the users can create databases.| :x: |Modify database engines| :x:|
    | database-clusters|You can view databases| You can create databases|You can modify databases| You can delete databases|
    | database-cluster-backups|You can view database cluster backups| You can create database cluster backups|You can modify database cluster backups| You can delete database cluster backups|
    | database-cluster-restores|You can view database cluster restores| You can create database cluster restores|You can modify database cluster restores| You can delete database cluster restores|

>     | backup-storages and monitoring-instances |You can siew backups and monitroing endpoints| You can create backups and monitroing endpoints|You can modify backups and monitroing endpoints| You can delete backups and monitroing endpoints|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | backup-storages and monitoring-instances |You can view backups and monitroing endpoints| You can create backups and monitroing endpoints|You can modify backups and monitroing endpoints| You can delete backups and monitroing endpoints|
```

    | database-cluster-credentials|View database data (credentials) </br> </br>**Note**: If no policy is defined:</br> * You cannot see the credentials and the connection string.</br> * You also cannot create a database from any backup.| :x: |:x:| :x:|

## Policy definition in RBAC

RBAC policies are the rules and guidelines that define how roles, permissions, and users are managed within RBAC. These policies ensure that users have appropriate access to resources based on their roles within Percona Everest.

The policy definiton in Percona Everest is:

```sh
p, <subject>, <resource-type>, <action>, <resource-name>
```

Where:

> **subject**: refers to the name of the role or user. For example, `adminrole:role` or `admin`

Reviewer: Just to keep consistent with the below lines:

```suggestion
**subject**: Refers to the name of the role or user. For example, `adminrole:role` or `admin`
```

# Role Based Access Control

Role-based access control (RBAC) restricts access to resources within Percona Everest. It establishes a framework that defines access permissions and privileges according to individual users' roles. With RBAC, only authorized individuals can access specific information or perform certain actions based on their assigned roles. This method improves security by minimizing the risk of unauthorized access and helps manage permissions more efficiently across Percona Everest.

## Default role

In Percona Everest, the only predefined default role is **adminrole:role**, which is assigned to the **admin** user. Hence, this **admin** user has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.

This default built-in role definition can be seen in [policy.csv](https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L91).

## RBAC resources and privileges

Below is a comprehensive table outlining the permissions granted for various **resources**:

> ??? info "Permissions for resources"

Author: Discussed with @recharte Diogo

    |**Resource**| **Read**| **Create**| **Update**|**Delete**|
    |------------|---------|-----------|-----------|----------|
    | namespaces|You can view namespaces| :x:  |:x: | :x:|
    | database-engines </br> (MySQL, MongoDB, PostreSQL)|You view can database engines when you create databases</br>  </br>**Note**: This policy must at least be **read all** so the users can create databases.| :x: |Modify database engines| :x:|
    | database-clusters|You can view databases| You can create databases|You can modify databases| You can delete databases|
    | database-cluster-backups|You can view database cluster backups| You can create database cluster backups|You can modify database cluster backups| You can delete database cluster backups|
    | database-cluster-restores|You can view database cluster restores| You can create database cluster restores|You can modify database cluster restores| You can delete database cluster restores|
    | backup-storages and monitoring-instances |You can view backups and monitroing endpoints| You can create backups and monitroing endpoints|You can modify backups and monitroing endpoints| You can delete backups and monitroing endpoints|

>     | database-cluster-credentials|View database data (credentials) </br> </br>**Note**: If no policy is defined:</br> * You cannot see the credentials and the connection string.</br> * You also cannot create a database from any backup.| :x: |:x:| :x:|

Author: will do it.

>     | database-cluster-credentials|View database data (credentials) </br> </br>**Note**: If no policy is defined:</br> * You cannot see the credentials and the connection string.</br> * You also cannot create a database from any backup.| :x: |:x:| :x:|

Author: Fixed

            - **namespace**:  `Read` access in all the namespaces.
            - **Database engines**: `Read` access to all the database engines
            - **Database clusters**:  `Read` and update access for all the database clusters
            - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess for **all** the databases
            - **Backup storages**: `Read` access to all the backup storages
            - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access to all the monitoring instances

## Assigning roles to users

In order for roles to take effect, they need to be assigned to users. The syntax for this is as follows:

```sh
g, username, rolename
```

A new user in Percona Everest will initially have **no** permissions. To grant permissions, you must edit your RBAC configuration stored in the `everest-rbac` `ConfigMap` in the `everest-system` namespace:

```sh
kubectl edit configmap-rbac -n everest-system
```

A text editor will open, and you can edit the `ConfigMap` as follows. You just have to add the new user and assign it the desired role.

```sh
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: everest-rbac
data:
  policy.csv: |

>     p, adminrole:role, namespaces, read, *
>     p, adminrole:role, database-engines, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-clusters, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-credentials, read, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, backup-storages, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, monitoring-instances, *, */*

Reviewer 2: We have [updated the adminrole](https://github.com/percona/everest/pull/649/files). Please reflect the changes here:
```suggestion
    p, adminrole:role, namespaces, *, *
    p, adminrole:role, database-engines, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, database-clusters, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-credentials, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, backup-storages, *, */*
    p, adminrole:role, monitoring-instances, *, */*
```

```sh       
p, team-dev:role, namespaces, read, dev
p, team-dev:role, database-engines, read, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, read, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, update, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, create, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, delete, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, database-cluster-credentials, read, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, backup-storages, read, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, monitoring-instances, read, dev/*
p, team-dev:role, database-cluster-restores, create, dev/*
g, john, team-dev:role
```

The `team-dev` role has the following privileges **only** within the `dev` namespace:

- **namespace**:  `Read` access to `dev`
- **Database engines**: `Read` access
- **Database clusters**: `Read` access
- **Database clusters**: `Update` access
- **Database clusters**: `Create` access

    ![!image](../images/rbac_cluster_permissions.png)

- **Database cluster credentials**: `Read` access
- **Backup storages**: `Read` access

    ![!image](../images/rbac_storages_permissions.png)

- **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access

    ![!image](../images/rbac_monitoring_permissions.png)

> - **Database cluster restores**: `Create` access

Author: Sure.

Role-based access control (RBAC) restricts access to resources within Percona Everest. It establishes a framework that defines access permissions and privileges according to individual users' roles. With RBAC, only authorized individuals can access specific information or perform certain actions based on their assigned roles. This method improves security by minimizing the risk of unauthorized access and helps manage permissions more efficiently across Percona Everest.

## Default role

In Percona Everest, the only predefined role is **adminrole:role**, which is assigned to the **admin** user. Hence, this **admin** user has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.

This default built-in role definition can be seen in [policy.csv](https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L94-L102).

## RBAC resources and permissions

Below is a comprehensive table outlining the permissions granted for various **resources**:

??? info "Permissions for resources"

    !!! warning "Important"

>         - If you have permission for specific namespaces or resources, you can perform read, update, create, or delete actions **only** on those resources or **only** within those namespaces. However, if you have permission for **all** the resources or namespaces, you can carry out these actions across all the resources and namespaces.

Author: Fixed.

??? info "Permissions for resources"

    !!! warning "Important"
        - If you have permission for specific namespaces or resources, you can perform read, update, create, or delete actions **only** on those resources or **only** within those namespaces. However, if you have permission for **all** the resources or namespaces, you can carry out these actions across all the resources and namespaces.
        - :x: Represents an action that's not supported by the Percona Everest API.

    </br> </br>

    **Table: Permissions for the various resources in Percona Everest**

    |**Resource**| **Read**| **Create**| **Update**|**Delete**|
    |------------|---------|-----------|-----------|----------|
    | namespaces|You can view namespaces| :x:|:x: | :x:|
    | database-engines </br> (MySQL, MongoDB, PostreSQL)|You view can database engines when you create databases</br>  </br>**Note**: This policy must at least be **read all** so the users can create databases.| :x: |Modify database engines| :x:|
    | database-clusters|You can view databases| You can create databases|You can modify databases| You can delete databases|

>     | database-cluster-backups|You can view database cluster backups| You can create database cluster backups|You can modify database cluster backups| You can delete database cluster backups|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    | database-cluster-backups|You can view database cluster backups| You can create database cluster backups|:x:| You can delete database cluster backups|
```

# Role Based Access Control

Role-based access control (RBAC) restricts access to resources within Percona Everest. It establishes a framework that defines access permissions and privileges according to individual users' roles. With RBAC, only authorized individuals can access specific information or perform certain actions based on their assigned roles. This method improves security by minimizing the risk of unauthorized access and helps manage permissions more efficiently across Percona Everest.

## How to enable RBAC

To enable or disable RBAC in Percona Everest, you can use a configuration flag that allows switching between RBAC-enabled and RBAC-disabled modes. By default, RBAC is disabled.

> Here's how you can enable RBAC:

Author: Fixed.

```sh
apiVersion: v1
data:

>   enabled: "false"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  enabled: "true"
```

  policy.csv: |
    g, admin, role:admin
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: everest-rbac
  namespace: everest-system
```

## Policy definition in RBAC

RBAC policies are the rules and guidelines that define how roles, permissions, and users are managed within RBAC. These policies ensure that users have appropriate access to resources based on their roles within Percona Everest.

The policy definition in Percona Everest is:

```sh
p, <subject>, <resource-type>, <action>, <resource-name>
```

Where:

**subject**: Refers to the name of the role or user. For example, `adminrole:role` or `admin`

**resource-type**: Refers to the type of Everest resource, such as `namespaces`, `database-clusters`, `database-engines`, etc.

> **[action](#rbac-resources-and-permissions)**: Refers to the action the subject can perform. For example, `read`, `update`, `delete`, `create`, or `*`

Author: Fixed.

> For in-depth information on the actions that a resource can perform, see the [resources and permissions](#rbac-resources-and-permissions) section.

Author: Fixed.

**resource-name**: Refers to a specific instance of the given resource-type. The argument should be prefixed with the namespace in which the resource is present. For example, `my-namespace/my-cluster-1`, `my-namespace-2/my-backup-1`, etc. You may also use a wildcard, such as `*`, `*/*`, or `my-namespace/*`

> ### Admin policy
> 
> Check out the policy for an **Admin** role:
> 
> ```sh
>     p, adminrole:role, namespaces, *, *
>     p, adminrole:role, database-engines, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-clusters, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-credentials, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, backup-storages, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, monitoring-instances, *, */*
> ```
> 
> ### Read only policy
> 
> Check out the policy for a **readonly** role:
> 
> ```sh
>     p, readonly:role, namespaces, read, *
>     p, readonly:role, database-engines, read, */*
>     p, readonly:role, database-clusters, read, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-credentials, read, */*
>     p, readonly:role, backup-storages, read, */*
>     p, readonly:role, monitoring-instances, read, */*

Reviewer 2: Let's start with a very simple example instead, we have examples for detailed full roles below, here we just want users to understand the basic format.
```suggestion
### Example policies

The following policies grant `example-user` unrestricted access to database clusters and `read` access to database cluster backups, meaning that the user won't be able to `create` or `delete` any backup.

```sh
    p, example-user, database-clusters, *, */*
    p, example-user, database-cluster-backups, read, */*
```

```

![!image](../images/rbac_readonly_role.png)

![!image](../images/rbac_readonly_ns.png)

## RBAC resources and permissions

> Below is a comprehensive table outlining the permissions granted for various **resources**:

Reviewer 2: Nothing has been granted yet
```suggestion
Below is a comprehensive table outlining the permissions available for various **resources**:
```

    === "Backups"
    
        For on-demand backups and schedules, you should grant `read` permissions for `backup storages` as well.

    === "Restores"

        For restores, to new and existing databases, you should grant the following permisssions as well:

        - Read `backups` (of the old DB)
        - Read `MonitoringConfig` (if the old DB has monitoring enabled)
        - Read `database cluster credentials` (of the old DB)
        - Create `backups` (if backup schedules are enabled)
   
    === "Upgrades"

        For upgrades, the following permissions must be granted:

        - Read Namespaces
        - Read all `database engines` in that namespace
        - Read all `database clusters` in that namespace
        - Update `database clusters` in that namespace

## Roles in RBAC

In Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), a Role is a set of permissions that define what actions (like read, write, update, delete) can be performed on specific resources within Percona Everest. In RBAC, roles are assigned to users, allowing them to interact with the resources according to the permissions defined by their roles.

> ### Default role

Reviewer 2: Default might imply that this gets applied to new users which isn't true.
```suggestion
### Built-in role
```

> In Percona Everest, the only predefined role is **adminrole:role**, which is assigned to the **admin** user. Hence, this **admin** user has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.

Reviewer 2: RBAC is off by default and the role isn't automatically assigned.
```suggestion
In Percona Everest, the only predefined role is **role:admin**. A user with this role has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.
```

> This default built-in role definition can be seen in [policy.csv](https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L94-L102).
> 

Reviewer 2: No longer exists here
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Additionally, it might be worth mentioning that the `role:admin` always exists internally. You can not see it in the the ConfigMap, hence you cannot modify it either. You may only assign roles/users to it.

> ## RBAC examples

Reviewer 2: Let's move this section to after the `Assigning roles to users`.

        Let's set up a dev group role with **read/update/create** access to **all** the namespaces:

        ```sh
        p, team-darkside:role, namespaces, read, */*
        p, team-darkside:role, database-engines, read, */*
        p, team-darkside:role, database-clusters, read, */*
        p, team-darkside:role, database-clusters, update, */*
        p, team-darkside:role, database-clusters-credentials, read, */*
        p, team-darkside:role, backup-storages, read, */*
        p, team-darkside:role, monitoring-instances, read, */*
        ```

        ??? info "Let's dive into decoding this!"

            The `team-darkside` role has the following privileges in **all** the namespaces:

            - **namespace**:  `Read` access in all the namespaces.
            - **Database engines**: `Read` access to all the database engines
            - **Database clusters**:  `Read` and update access for all the database clusters
            - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess for **all** the databases
            - **Backup storages**: `Read` access to all the backup storages
            - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access to all the monitoring instances

> ## Assigning roles to users

Reviewer 2: Let' move this section to after the `Built-in role` and before the `RBAC examples`.

In order for roles to take effect, they need to be assigned to users. The syntax for this is as follows:

```sh
g, username, rolename
```

A new user in Percona Everest will initially have **no** permissions. To grant permissions, you must edit your RBAC configuration stored in the `everest-rbac` `ConfigMap` in the `everest-system` namespace:

```sh
kubectl edit configmap-rbac -n everest-system
```

A text editor will open, and you can edit the `ConfigMap` as follows. You just have to add the new user and assign it the desired role.

```sh
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: everest-rbac
data:
  policy.csv: |

>     p, adminrole:role, namespaces, *, *
>     p, adminrole:role, database-engines, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-clusters, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, database-cluster-credentials, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, backup-storages, *, */*
>     p, adminrole:role, monitoring-instances, *, */*
>     g, admin, adminrole:role
>     g, <newuser>, adminrole:role

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    g, admin, role:admin
    g, <newuser>, role:admin
```

```

> For example, let's assign the role `team-dev` to a new user named John:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, let's assign the role `team-dev` to a new user named `john`:
```

Reviewer 2: Please see [this comment](https://github.com/percona/everest-doc/pull/140#discussion_r1768556422) instead

```sh       

> p, team-dev:role, namespaces, read, dev
> p, team-dev:role, database-engines, read, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, read, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, update, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, create, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, database-clusters, delete, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, database-cluster-credentials, read, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, backup-storages, read, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, monitoring-instances, read, dev/*
> p, team-dev:role, database-cluster-restores, create, dev/*
> g, john, team-dev:role

Reviewer 2: Let's keep it simple for now, no backups/restores
```suggestion
p, role:team-dev, namespaces, read, dev
p, role:team-dev, database-engines, read, dev/*
p, role:team-dev, database-clusters, read, dev/*
p, role:team-dev, database-clusters, update, dev/*
p, role:team-dev, database-clusters, create, dev/*
p, role:team-dev, database-clusters, delete, dev/*
p, role:team-dev, database-cluster-credentials, read, dev/*
g, john, role:team-dev
```

Reviewer 2: I'm actually questioning this now, should this even be here? Should we simply move this to the examples section?

Reviewer 2: I think we should... In this section we just need to show how to actually assign a user with we already did with the `role:admin` example above. I think this makes it too crowded.

```

The `team-dev` role has the following privileges **only** within the `dev` namespace:

- **namespace**:  `Read` access to `dev`
- **Database engines**: `Read` access
- **Database clusters**: `Read` access
- **Database clusters**: `Update` access

> - **Database clusters**: `Create` access

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Database clusters**: `Create` access
- **Database clusters**: `Delete` access
```

Reviewer 2: Please see [this comment](https://github.com/percona/everest-doc/pull/140#discussion_r1768556422) instead

    ![!image](../images/rbac_cluster_permissions.png)

- **Database cluster credentials**: `Read` access

> - **Backup storages**: `Read` access
> 
>     ![!image](../images/rbac_storages_permissions.png)
> 
> - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access
> 
>     ![!image](../images/rbac_monitoring_permissions.png)
> 
> - **Database cluster restores**: `Create` access

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Please see [this comment](https://github.com/percona/everest-doc/pull/140#discussion_r1768556422) instead

## Validate your RBAC policy

You can verify whether your Role-based access control (RBAC) policies are functioning correctly by executing the following command:

```sh

> everestctl settings rbac validate --policy-file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
everestctl settings rbac validate --policy-file <file_path>
```

```

Where:

`policy-file` is an optional flag that takes the **policy file** path. If you do not specify the path to this file, it will look for the configuration file inside your existing Percona Everest installation, that is, under RBAC `ConfigMap`.

??? Example "Policy validation"

    The following example demonstrates that this is a valid policy.

    ```sh
    everestctl settings rbac validate --policy-file ./pkg/rbac/testdata/policy-1-good.csv
    ```
    Output:

    ```{.text .no-copy}
    ✓ Valid
    ```

    The following example demonstrates that this is an invalid policy.

    ```sh
    everestctl settings rbac validate --policy-file ./pkg/rbac/testdata/policy-bad.csv
    ```

    output:

    ```{.text .no-copy}
    × Invalid
    policy syntax error - unknown resource name 'non-existent-resource'
    ```

## Test your RBAC policy

You can verify if a role or individual (such as a group or a local user) has the necessary privileges to perform particular operations on designated resources. 

We have a straightforward command that can be used to test the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) policies:

```sh

> everestctl settings rbac can --policy-file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
everestctl settings rbac can --policy-file <file_path>
```

# Role Based Access Control

    !!! warning "Disclaimer"

>         RBAC is currently in **Technical Preview**. Early adopters are advised to use this feature only for testing purposes and not in production environments.

Reviewer 2: This isn't rendering correctly

Author: Fixed

**resource-type**: Refers to the type of Everest resource, such as `namespaces`, `database-clusters`, `database-engines`, etc.

For in-depth information on the actions that a subject can perform, see the [resources and permissions](#rbac-resources-and-permissions) section.

**action**: Refers to the action the subject can perform. For example, `read`, `update`, `delete`, `create`, or `*`

**resource-name**: Refers to a specific instance of the given resource-type. The argument should be prefixed with the namespace in which the resource is present `<namespace>/<resource-name>`. For example, `my-namespace/my-cluster-1`, `my-namespace-2/my-backup-1`, etc. You may also use a wildcard, such as `*`, `*/*`, or `my-namespace/*`

!!! info "Important"
    If you have permission for specific namespaces or resources, you can perform read, update, create, or delete actions **only** on those resources or **only** within those namespaces. However, if you have permission for **all** the resources or namespaces, you can carry out these actions across all the resources and namespaces.

Example:

`p, example-user, database-clusters, read, example-namespace/example-db`

> In this cas, the `example-user` user has permissions to read a database called `example-db` in the `example-namespace `namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, the `example-user` user has permissions to read a database called `example-db` in the `example-namespace `namespace.
```

        - Read `database cluster credentials` (of the old DB)
        - Create `backups` (if backup schedules are enabled)
   
    === "Upgrades"

        For upgrades, the following permissions must be granted:

        - Read Namespaces
        - Read all `database engines` in that namespace
        - Read all `database clusters` in that namespace
        - Update `database clusters` in that namespace

## Roles in RBAC

In Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), a Role is a set of permissions that define what actions (like read, write, update, delete) can be performed on specific resources within Percona Everest. In RBAC, roles are assigned to users, allowing them to interact with the resources according to the permissions defined by their roles.

!!! note
    It is recommended to prefix role names with **role:** to prevent confusion between role names and user names.

### Built-in role

In Percona Everest, the only predefined role is **role:admin**. A user with this role has unrestricted access to Percona Everest. However, the RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) configuration can define and allocate specific roles based on individual requirements and access privileges.

> This default built-in role definition can be seen in [policy.csv](https://github.com/percona/everest/blob/main/deploy/quickstart-k8s.yaml#L94-L102).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This built-in `role:admin` definition is equivalent to the following:

        ```sh
        p, role:admin, namespaces, *, *
        p, role:admin, database-engines, *, */*
        p, role:admin, database-clusters, *, */*
        p, role:admin, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
        p, role:admin, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
        p, role:admin, database-cluster-credentials, *, */*
        p, role:admin, backup-storages, *, */*
        p, role:admin, monitoring-instances, *, */*
        ```
```

## RBAC examples

In this section, we will explore some examples that demonstrate how to create policy definitions for the required roles.

??? Example "Examples"

    Let's dive into some role definitions for RBAC:
    

>     === "Admin role" 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    === "Namespace admin role" 
```

    
        **Admin role for a single namepsace**

        Let's set up an admin role with unrestricted privileges to all the resources in a single namespace called `namespaceA`.

        ```sh

>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, namespaces, *, namespaceA
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, database-engines, *, namespaceA/*
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, database-clusters, *, namespaceA/*
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, database-cluster-backups, *, namespaceA/*
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, database-cluster-restores, *, namespaceA/*
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, database-cluster-credentials, *, namespaceA/*
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, backup-storages, *, namespaceA/*
>         p, role:namespaceAdmin, monitoring-instances, *, namespaceA/*

Reviewer 2: I'm so sorry, in the last review I suggested something that was wrong, you had it correctly at first.
```suggestion
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, namespaces, *, namespaceA
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, database-engines, *, namespaceA/*
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, database-clusters, *, namespaceA/*
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, database-cluster-backups, *, namespaceA/*
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, database-cluster-restores, *, namespaceA/*
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, database-cluster-credentials, *, namespaceA/*
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, backup-storages, *, namespaceA/*
        p, role:namespaceAadmin, monitoring-instances, *, namespaceA/*
```

        p, role:dbadmin, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
        p, role:dbadmin, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
        p, role:dbadmin, database-cluster-credentials, *, */*
        p, role:dbadmin, backup-storages, read, */*
        p, role:dbadmin, monitoring-instances, read, */*
        ```

        ??? info "Let's dive into decoding this!"

            The `dbadmin` role has the following privileges in **all** the namespaces:

            - **namespace**: `Read` access in all the namespaces.
            - **Database engines**: `Read` access to all the database engines
            - **Database clusters**: `All` access (read, create, update, delete)
            - **Database cluster backups**: `All` access (read, create, delete)
            - **Database cluster restores**: `All` access (read, create, update, delete)
            - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess for **all** the databases       
            - **Backup storages**: `Read` access to all the backup storages
            - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access to all the monitoring instances

        **2. Database admin role for a single database**

>         Let's set up a role that has access to only a single database:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Let's set up a role that has access to only a single database called `databaseA`:
```

> # Role Based Access Control

Reviewer 2: Let's add a banner saying that this feature is in tech-preview stage

Author: Fixed.

```

Where:

**subject**: Refers to the name of the role or user. For example, `role:admin` or `admin`

**resource-type**: Refers to the type of Everest resource, such as `namespaces`, `database-clusters`, `database-engines`, etc.

For in-depth information on the actions that a subject can perform, see the [resources and permissions](#rbac-resources-and-permissions) section.

**action**: Refers to the action the subject can perform. For example, `read`, `update`, `delete`, `create`, or `*`

**resource-name**: Refers to a specific instance of the given resource-type. The argument should be prefixed with the namespace in which the resource is present `<namespace>/<resource-name>`. For example, `my-namespace/my-cluster-1`, `my-namespace-2/my-backup-1`, etc. You may also use a wildcard, such as `*`, `*/*`, or `my-namespace/*`

!!! info "Important"
    If you have permission for specific namespaces or resources, you can perform read, update, create, or delete actions **only** on those resources or **only** within those namespaces. However, if you have permission for **all** the resources or namespaces, you can carry out these actions across all the resources and namespaces.

> 

Author: Fixed.

            - **Monitoring instances**: `All` access (read, create, update, delete)

        **2. Admin role for a single namespace**

        Let's set up a role for just one namespace called `the-dark-side`.

        ```sh
        p, role:admin-darkside, namespaces, *, the-dark-side
        p, role:admin-darkside, database-engines, *, the-dark-side/*
        p, role:admin-darkside, database-clusters, *, the-dark-side/*
        p, role:admin-darkside, database-cluster-credentials, *, the-dark-side/*
        p, role:admin-darkside, backup-storages, *, the-dark-side/*
        p, role:admin-darkside, monitoring-instances, *, the-dark-side/*
        ```

        ??? info "Let's dive into decoding this!"

            The `admin-darkside` role has the following privileges **only** within `the-dark-side` namespace:

            - **namespace**:  `Read` access to the `the-dark-side`  .
            - **Database engines**: `Read` and `update` access
            - **Database clusters**: `All` access (read, create, update, delete)
            - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess
            - **Backup storages**: `All` access (read, create, update, delete)

>             - **Monitoring instances**: `All` access (read, create, update, delete)

Author: Fixed

            

    === "Read only role" 
    
        **1. Read only role for all the namespaces**

        Let's set up a read ony role for all the namespaces.

        ```sh
            p, role:readonly, namespaces, read, *
            p, role:readonly, database-engines, read, */*
            p, role:readonly, database-clusters, read, */*
            p, role:readonly, database-cluster-backups, *, */*
            p, role:readonly, database-cluster-restores, *, */*
            p, role:readonly, database-cluster-credentials, read, */*
            p, role:readonly, backup-storages, read, */*
            p, role:readonly, monitoring-instances, read, */*
        ```    

        ??? info "Let's dive into decoding this!"

            The `readonly` role has the following privileges in all the namespaces:

            - **namespace**:  `Read` access to all the namespaces
            - **Database engines**: `Read` access
            - **Database clusters**: Read` access
            - **Database cluster backups**: `Read` 
            - **Database cluster rstores**: `Read`
            - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess
            - **Backup storages**: `Read` access

>             - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access

Author: Fixed

        **2. Dev role with read/update/create access to all the namespaces**
        
        Let's set up a dev group role with **read/update/create** access to **all** the namespaces:

        ```sh
        p, role:team-darkside, namespaces, read, */*
        p, role:team-darkside, database-engines, read, */*
        p, role:team-darkside, database-clusters, read, */*
        p, role:team-darkside, database-clusters, update, */*
        p, role:team-darkside, database-clusters-credentials, read, */*
        p, role:team-darkside, backup-storages, read, */*
        p, role:team-darkside, monitoring-instances, read, */*
        ```

        ??? info "Let's dive into decoding this!"

            The `team-darkside` role has the following privileges in **all** the namespaces:

            - **namespace**: `Read` access in all the namespaces.
            - **Database engines**: `Read` access to all the database engines
            - **Database clusters**:  `Read` and `update` access for all the database clusters
            - **Database clusters credentials**: `Read` acccess for **all** the databases
            - **Backup storages**: `Read` access to all the backup storages

>             - **Monitoring instances**: `Read` access to all the monitoring instances

Author: ok.
